---
layout: post
title: Semester 1 | Weeks 4-5
---

“Predicting Splicing from Primary Sequence with Deep Learning” is a peer reviewed research paper that discusses SpliceAI, a deep residual neural network that can predict splicing from a pre-mRNA sequence. To begin, researchers introduce the topic of exome sequencing, and how it aids in the clinical diagnosis of patients with rare genetic diseases. However, they note that exome sequencing has a diagnostic yield of only 25-30%, leaving a majority of patients without a clear diagnosis. With the emergence of RNA sequencing, the researchers express optimism for detecting splicing abnormalities in mendelian disorders, and propose that a general predictive model of splicing from a pre-mRNA sequence would allow for precise prediction of splice altering consequences of noncoding variants, improving diagnosis for patients with genetic diseases.  

SpliceAI was constructed to solve the problem noted above. It is a deep residual neural network that predicts whether each position in a pre-mRNA transcript is a splice donor, acceptor, or neither from the genomic sequence of the pre-mRNA transcript. The spliceAI architecture makes use of a residual block, which consists of batch-normalization layers, rectified linear units, and convolutional units in a specific manner. The power of residual layers lies with their ability to overcome the problem of exploding/vanishing gradients, which is common in extremely deep neural networks. Several networks were trained, notably SpliceAI-80nt, SpliceAI-400nt, SpliceAI-2k, and SpliceAI-10k, which use 40, 200, 1,000, and 5,000 nucleotides on each side of a position of interest as input respectively. The input to each of the models is a sequence of nucleotides, which have been one hot encoded. Specifically, A, C, G, and T are encoded as [1, 0, 0, 0], [0, 1, 0, 0], [0, 0, 1, 0], and [0, 0, 0, 1] respectively. The model outputs the probability of the position being a splice acceptor, donor, or neither in the form of three scores, which sum to 1. 

SpliceAI was trained on the GENOCODE V24lift37 gene annotation table, where 20,287 protein-coding gene annotations were extracted, with genes that did not have any splice junctions removed. The genes that belonged to chromosomes 2, 4, 6, 8, 10-22, X, and Y were used for training the models, while chromosomes 1, 3, 5, 7, and 9 were used for testing. For each gene, the mRNA transcript sequence between the transcription start and end sites were extracted from the hg19/ GRCh37 assembly. Leafcutter_cluster, a utility in the leafcutter package, was used to detect and count splice junctions in each sample. The researchers compiled the union of all leafcutter junctions across all samples, and junctions that were present in 5 or more individuals were used to augment the list of GENCODE annotated splice junctions. The model was trained for 10 epochs with a batch size of 12, with categorical cross entropy and the Adam optimizer utilized. 

Once trained, SpliceAI achieved a 95% top-k accuracy when predicting splice junctions, and 84% top-k accuracy on long noncoding RNA (the authors note that the noncoding transcript annotations were incomplete, so a decrease in accuracy was expected). Furthermore, the authors extended SpliceAI to evaluate genetic variants for their potential to alter splicing, and found that private mutations that have functional consequences can be found at private novel splice junctions and the boundaries of exons that are skipped over. The researchers found that the model can accurately predict both exon skipping and cryptic site activation events. 

The researchers further discuss SpliceAI’s ability to predict the effects of de novo mutations on splicing for cohorts with autism spectrum disorder, with unaffected siblings as the control. The de novo mutations disrupting splicing were more common in individuals with intellectual disability and autism spectrum disorder. These cryptic splice mutations account for approximately 9% of pathogenic mutations in intellectual disability, and 11% in autism spectrum disorder. This shows how the model can be used to identify and understand the impact of cryptic splice mutations and improve knowledge of their genetic origins.  

The article showcases how a model like SpliceAI can be used to solve the complex question of how genetic mutations can affect the splicing process, and how this can be utilized by researchers to further understand genetic disorders like autism spectrum disorder. From a machine learning perspective, we can see the power of one hot encoding, and how it can be used to quantify a sequence of nucleotides. In my own project, I will attempt a similar process of mapping my own junction start and end sites to a given assembly, encoding the resulting sequence, and building the model. 

Predicting Splicing from Primary Sequence with Deep Learning: 

https://www.cell.com/cell/pdf/S0092-8674(18)31629-5.pdf
