---
layout: post
title: Week 1-3
---

The purpose of this journal section is to document the development of my project over the course of an academic school year. I will be working with Professor David Knowles of Columbia University and the New York Genome Center (NYCG) to develop a machine learning model in the domain of computational genomics. In particular, I will develop a model that can predict a junction site’s usage ratio and apply the model to datasets regarding autism spectrum disorder. 

I envision this journal as a record of my journey in developing a machine learning project. It will encompass not only the coding aspects, but also the principles and intricacies of machine learning and genomics that I acquire along the way. Rather than stating what I did, I will explain the reasoning behind each decision. Ultimately, my objective is to comprehend machine learning in sufficient depth to enable me to apply techniques across a diverse range of fields, and to share my process in a way that’s easy to understand. 

The first few weeks were spent formulating a research question and acclimating to research at the Genome Center. This time was mostly used to build my genomics foundation in preparation for my research, which included refreshing basic concepts on genomics and defining terms. 

*GENETICS* -  The branch of biology studying inheritance, including genes, DNA variation, and their interactions. Human genetic code is made up of DNA, which is divided into 23 pairs of chromosomes, which together make up the complete set of genetic instructions for every individual.

*GENOMICS* - A field of biology focused on studying the entire set of genetic information of an organism. Genomics involves sequencing, assembly, characterization, and variation of genes and their functions.

*GENOME* -The genome is the entire set of genetic information of an organism. It is made up of DNA, GENES, and CHROMOSOMES. In humans, the genome consists of 23 pairs of chromosomes located in the cell’s nucleus, as well as a small chromosome in the cell’s mitochondria. A genome contains all the information needed for an individual to develop and function.

*DNA (Deoxyribonucleic Acid)* - Considered the building block of genes, it is a molecule that carries genetic information with instructions for the development and functioning of an organism. DNA is made of two linked strands that wind around each other to resemble a twisted ladder (Double helix). Each strand has a backbone made of alternating sugar (deoxyribose) and phosphate groups. Attached to each sugar is one of four (nucleotide) bases: adenine (A), cytosine (C), guanine (G) or thymine (T). Strands are connected by chemical bonds between the bases: A-T : C-G. The sequence of the bases along DNA’s backbone encodes biological information, such as the instructions for making a protein or RNA molecule. 

*GENE* - A unit of DNA on a chromosome that is encoded for a specific purpose, and contains information needed to specify physical and biological traits. Most genes code for specific proteins/segments of proteins, which have differing functions within the body. Genes are considered to be the basic unit of inheritance, and are passed from parent to offspring during reproduction.

*RNA (Ribonucleic Acid)* - A nucleic acid present in all living cells that is single-stranded and has a backbone made of alternating phosphate groups and the sugar ribose. Attached to each sugar is one of four bases: adenine (A), uracil (U), cytosine (C) or guanine (G). Different types of RNA exist in cells, including messenger RNA (mRNA), ribosomal RNA (rRNA) and transfer RNA (tRNA), among others. RNA molecules are essential for the regulation of gene expression and the translation of genetic information into proteins. 

*Chromosome* - Threadlike structures made of protein and a single molecule of DNA that serve to carry the genomic information from cell to cell. In plants and animals, chromosomes reside in the nucleus of cells. Humans have 22 pairs of numbered chromosomes (autosomes) and one pair of sex chromosomes (XX or XY), for a total of 46. 

*Intron* - A region that resides within a gene but does not remain in the final mature mRNA molecule following transcription of that gene. It DOES NOT code for amino acids that make up the protein encoded by that gene. 

*Exon* - A region of the genome that ends up within an mRNA molecule. Some exons are coding, in that they contain information for making a protein, whereas others are non-coding. The region will eventually code for amino acids, which are the building blocks for proteins.

*Junctions* - Locations in DNA or RNA sequences where different segments are joined together. In DNA sequencing, junctions can refer to structural variations in the genome, such as insertions, deletions, inversions, or translocations. In RNA sequencing, junctions usually refer to splice junctions in the pre-mRNA molecules where the RNA strand was cut and adjacent exons are joined together. 

*Upstream* - Each end of a DNA molecule has a number, with one end referred to as 5’ (Five Prime) and 3’ (Three Prime), which refer to the number of carbon atoms in a deoxyribose sugar molecule that a phosphate group bonds. Upstream is the DNA before a gene in the 5’ region. 

*Downstream* - The DNA after a gene in the 3’ region. 

*Transcription* - The process by which RNA is produced from a DNA template. First, the DNA is partially unwound to form a “bubble”. RNA polymerase is recruited to the transcription start site by regulatory protein complexes. Next, RNA polymerase reads the DNA from the 3’ to 5’ direction, placing down complementary bases to form mRNA (Uracil instead of Thymine). In eukaryotes, processes can edit the mRNA further; splicing removes introns (don’t code for proteins), so that only the coding regions, the exons remain. Alternative splicing occurs when different regions of the primary transcript may be spliced out to lead to different protein products, with a wide variety of different molecules generated based on different splicing permutations. 
In addition to splicing, both ends of the mRNA molecule are processed, with the 5’ end capped with a modified guanine nucleotide. The 3’ end sees 250 adenine residues added to form a ploy(A) tail. 

*Translation* - The process by which RNA is translated into proteins. First, the ribosome binds to the 5’ end of the mRNA molecule and tRNA binds to the start codon. The ribosome moves along the mRNA in a 5’ to 3’ direction, reading each codon and bringing a matching tRNA with the corresponding amino acid, forming an amino acid chain that grows as the ribosome reads the mRNA. When the ribosome reaches a stop codon, it releases the amino acid chain, which makes up the protein and subsequently folds into its structure. 

In summary, DNA is the building block of genes that contain the coded instruction for building and maintaining an organism. Genes are units of DNA that are tasked with making specific proteins, which play a critical role in the structure and function of the body. Chromosomes are structures containing genes, and  are passed from parents to offspring and determine an individual's unique traits. An organism's complete set of DNA is called its genome. The importance of DNA cannot be understated, as any mutation in DNA can cause an abnormal protein to be produced, which can disrupt the body’s normal processes and lead to disease. 

DNA sequencing is the determination of the exact order of the bases in a strand of DNA. Remembering from our definitions, DNA bases exist as pairs, so identifying one of the bases in the pair can determine the other member of the pair. The DNA sequence in the genome is the same in every cell body. However, not all genes are expressed in every cell, and can express different sets of genes depending on their specific functions. This process is called gene expression. 

Looking more closely at the DNA sequences, we see that the protein sequences for many genes are broken down into smaller sections of coding sequences separated by non-coding sequences, which we call exons and introns, respectively.  In many genes, introns are much longer than the exons. Introns may contain sequences that regulate how genes are expressed or transcribed. When genes are transcribed, the exons and introns are included in the initial messenger RNA products, but are removed during the process called splicing, which is the process when introns are removed and exons rejoined to form a mature mRNA transcript. 

Building up from the basic information, we can better understand the mechanism and purpose behind our project, which is to predict the junction site usage ratio. We will accomplish this through a machine learning method called two dimensional convolution, which will train a model to predict this ratio with the training set that we create. 

After understanding the basic terminology and concepts, the next step is to look at the available literature, and understand some of the mechanisms behind similar research. Predicting Splicing from Primary Sequence with Deep Learning (2019), will serve as a baseline to understand the methodology behind deep learning and genomics in my own project. 

Resources: 

https://www.genome.gov/about-genomics/fact-sheets/A-Brief-Guide-to-Genomics
https://www.genome.gov/About-Genomics/Introduction-to-Genomics
https://www.genome.gov/genetics-glossary
https://ocw.mit.edu/ans7870/6/6.047/f15/MIT6_047F15_Compiled.pdf



